---
layout: post
title: The path to my first open source contribution 
---

# the motivation
There are countless websites out there that answer the questions of [how one can start contributing to open source or why one should contribute to open source?](https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/how-to-contribute-to-open-source-projects-beginners-guide/) However, the harsh reality is that making meaningful contributions to open source projects is a quite difficult endeavor. This is especially true for students and newbies who have only recently learned to crawl in the world of Software Engineering and lack the depth of knowledge to start contributing to projects without overcoming a massive learning curve. Consequently, many individuals, although initially highly motivated, get turned off of contributing as the reality of the situation overtakes the energized frenzy of a hundred tabs flying open trying to make sense of a 'good first issue.'

[According to a study by Google](https://opensource.google/static/documentation/publications/WhatBringsYouToOpenSource_2023.pdf), out of all the reasons stated by students and professional as to why they do not contribute to open source, 7 percent more students cited 'not sure where to start' as the prime hurdle in their journey, the largest difference out of all categories. It is true that a major section of the population of newbies fall in this category more so due to a lack of knowledge and experience, both of which can be gained by interacting with the community and the resources it provides and fighting through the initial learning curve. But as established in the previously, this is quite difficult and time consuming.

A core value of open source has always been to try and reward contributions appropriately, and I am a proponent of this model. People should be rewarded for their work appropriately. However, I find that this model has an unintended social media-esque effect, which especially affects newbies. ["Social comparisons are more likely when the comparison dimension is relevant to the self, and when the comparison target is similar to the self"](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2352250X20300464). These conditions are ripe in the world of open-source as the contributions of developers are posted for everyone to see. Therefore, comparisons like who is contributing more than you, were their contributions more difficult than yours, and how long they took to deliver can be used to judge the skill of a developer and compare with oneself. Several times over, I would be mesmerized by the superhuman nature of maintainers and be motivated to learn more about their journey and be inspired to try and get to their level (hopefully, true one day). But at the same time, I would also be subjected to bouts of impostor syndrome as I would struggle to understand what was going on in my own chunk of work. Questions like, are other struggling as much as I am? Should I ask this question? Am I good enough? would pop in my head.

While I cannot magically make the journey of getting through early career hell easier, I can provide additional support. However, doing so in the already widespread form of I have x experience, have accomplished y, so here is what I know about z is of no use because other people can do that much better than I can. Instead, I will take the opposite approach--a repository of all my struggles, failures and improvements as I worked to solidify my first contribution to a major open source project. In essence, I want this post to serve as a something to relate to and a documentation of my journey as I hone my skills.

# the spark
I got involved with Open Source in the Summer of 2024. I had not been able to land an internship, I was bored, and frankly was fueled with a little bit of rage due to my shortcomings. I had a huge desire to prove my worth. So I started looking for ways to gain marketable experience, specialize and find some mentors. I happened to come across [Dr. Chris Lattner's talk on the Golden Age of Compilers](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4HgShra-KnY) and [Huyen Chip's Introduction to ML Compilers and Optimizers](https://huyenchip.com/2021/09/07/a-friendly-introduction-to-machine-learning-compilers-and-optimizers.html) and was motivated to learn more about Compilers. I coupled this goal with the goal of learning a new, [supposedly the language of the future](https://www.whitehouse.gov/oncd/briefing-room/2024/02/26/press-release-technical-report/)--Rust. I asked myself, what better way to couple all these goals together than by contributing to the Rust Project--it hosts a compiler, I will be working on impactful projects in collaboration with talented developers, learn a new language, and all my efforts will be be visible publicly due to the nature of open source.
# a fizzle out
I failed to contribute meaningfully on my first excursion into open-source. Here is a quick rundown of why and what I learned:
1. **Quality > Quantity:** I took too much on my plate. I was splitting time learning about Compilers from an online textbook, learning about the Rust Language, and trying to make sense of the issue I was trying to contribute to. I was at the peak of the Dunning Kruger curve here--all confidence and little competency. Only after I started putting many hours into the process did I realize how much more there was to learn.
2. **Use your words:** Noting my lack of of expertise in the subject, I decided to take a 'contributor on training wheels' approach to the endeavor. I would work on issues locally and compare my work with the work that gets merged, but not claim issues explicitly. Effectively, my impostor syndrome led me to cut myself off of the community. Hence, each step in the process was labored with copious amounts of time dedicated to reading documentation,questioning my actions and decisions for correctness, and performing sanity checks, often over stuff that could be figured out much faster and collaborative manner of I built up the courage to ask questions and lend my empty head to be filled by the shared expertise of the community.
3. **Humbled:** I was extremely humbled by this experience. Open source was my first welcome to the actual world of software development. Working on school projects was fundamentally different since these were guided endeavors.Huge guardrails of support were provided by professors, peers and the internet. Putting it succinctly, college projects felt like working on a toy/model car, while working on a large open source project felt like working on an actual car.

At the end of the run, all the combing through documentation did lead to a [little contribution](https://github.com/rust-lang/rustc-dev-guide/pull/2009) helping with fixing typos in documentation.

# a steady burn
...But I did find success on the second go around. I fixed a bunch of the problems from my previous approach and learned more as I [contributed a new feature to the LLVM Project](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/pull/109914):
1. **Trusting the process:** I spent over a week trying to understand the issue I wanted to fix, often facing similar challenges repeatedly along the way. But getting through the process of iterating through multiple intermediate steps until finally reaching the desired solution reinforced my trust in my abilities and urged me onto the next step. I actively implemented changes after what I learned from failing on the Rust Project (**Quality > Quantity**). Hence, I shifted my focus to the completion of a few tasks. "I will learn whatever I interact with along the way." 
2. **Building my voice:** I isolated myself from the community when working on the Rust Project, but I did not repeat this mistake on the second go around. It took a lot of convincing my brain because I am the kind of person to only feel comfortable asking for help once I feel like I have gone through a really solid try. This is (toxically) with respect to how individuals around me are doing versus only looking at my abilities. But as I put myself out there and, in my mind, braced for impact, I only received kind comments and support. This positive reinforcement along with increasing confidence in my skills due to 1. helped me gain a voice. A lot of the fear of being judged and looked down upon by people better than me was shattered, especially as I went through the code review process, where my work was criticized and i had to explain my reasoning behind the decisions I made to find common ground with reviewers.

# closing remarks
Open-source communities need to find ways to engage and retain newbies in their communities. However, the barrier to entry in these communities is relatively high due to the prerequisites for knowledge and experience. One potential solution can be to host separate channels in the medium for discourse used by the community that are reserved for beginners. Not only should this channel be marketed this way, but the content itself should reflect the nature of the channel. Such a setting will allow newbies to feel comfortable asking questions and build their expertise as they interact with other individuals in such channels. Furthermore, more experienced community members can spend more time monitoring the discourse versus actively interacting in discussions since beginner-level questions are likely to be handled by peers with a little more knowledge than those asking the questions. This allows for more time in the hands of experienced contributors.

I thank [Professor Moomjy](https://amerstudies.rutgers.edu/people/teaching-faculty/teaching-faculty/thomas-e-moomjy) for supporting me through this endeavor. College often felt too restrictive in terms of learning. I would have the motivation to make blogs, contribute to open source, and self study something--all awesome ways to learn and grow. However, I would end up slogging through classwork, juggling work and leetcode + apply. I did learn a lot through these conventional ways, but very little of that knowledge is actively retrieved and renewed. If I would have one piece of advice to give to any college freshman, it would be to find people and activities that couple one's personal and professional (or general long term) goals. Such a coupling allows for a creative outlet that is meaningful and provides a sense of purpose and direction. Student organizations are a great start, but this can be taken a step further by arranging independent studies or even talking to professors to tailor specific assignments to fit one's goals (assuming one has found the right mentor.
